---
layout:     post
title:      "\"Git, the foundation\""
date:       2023-10-22
summary:    Starting the journey on Git
categories: git version-control swe
---


# Just notes

- Maybe the reason why most people survive with just `git pull`, `git add`, `git commit`, `git push` it's because the team culture does not teach/allow to really collaborate. What I mean is: in a team where proper code review, maintenance and codebase reading exists, must also be a consequence on using Git beyond the usual commands
- [Git immersion](https://gitimmersion.com/) looks good, but you still need to operate on the terminal and look at the website. I might try to integrate the two
- Notes on ["Tech talk: Linus Torvalds on git"](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4XpnKHJAok8):
  - Git was created because there was no distributed system (well, Bitkeeper, but commercial. At first they allowed to use it open source, but then politics and not used anymore. Also Mercurial, but I think Linus was already famous and Git at the time was doing stuff better, so...)
  - Git relieves from the commit access thing, because you have your own branch, your own copy and you do not affect other people. Earlier, before to commit, you **must pass *all* tests**. This means that, usually, you can even add stuff to others' repositories, but this won't be noticed (until you do not put things in their main branch)
  - Network of trust. At the end of the day you need to trust N people because you must do merging at some point
  - Git delegates, meaning: user A merges and tells user B to pull. B has problems in pulling because of conflicts or other stuff, then user A **must** solve it, because **they** merged
  - Git does not think at file level, but at content level, meaning: it considers the entire history of the project, call it the collection of files. If you are interested in a single file, git starts from the global history until it simplifies it -> INTERESTING TO MAYBE SEE HOW THIS REALLY WORKS
  - At the time the most important thing (to measure) was how fast merge it is




# Useful links

- [Learning Git through serious educational game](https://www.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:1480705/FULLTEXT01.pdf)


# Structure

## Introduction

In this last year I catched interest in version control systems (VSCs): I wanted to learn about their history, the motivation behind their development and what do they have in common. What originated this interest is the general discontent with Git and why it seems [too hard to learn](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6zWu6aOIT5I). I myself cannot say to be a master in Git, ~~and I saw few of my colleagues struggle with it~~.
The book ["Version control by example"](https://ericsink.com/vcbe/html/index.html), by Eric Sink, does a good job in explaining the evolution of VSCs: even though it was written in 2011, I find it still relevant.

Eric identifies three generations of VSC, which I renamed as the following:
1. Locked generation: files are locked, that is, only one person at time can work on a specific file
2. Centralized generation: files are not locked anymore, but since there is only one repository to which developers **directly** interact with[^1], they can commit their work only after they merged others' changes
3. Distributed generation: there is no central repository, rather a reference repository[^2]. Every developer's owns a local version of it, and they can commit,merge and branch in it as they wish, without interference.


The interesting bit is the passage from the centralized to the distributed generation. [In a famous talk by Linus on Git](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4XpnKHJAok8), he underlined several concepts behind the development of Git, which I find relevant to understand why these core ideas are the way they are and I will analyze them in the post. But first: why Linus created Git?

Before Git's existence the only relevant DVCS was Bitkeeper. It was being used in the development of the Linux kernel: however, because of differences between the advocates of open-source and proprietary software, Linus decided to part ways with it[^3]. Though there was a DVCS being developed at the same time of Git called Mercurial, Linus found it too similar to Bitkeeper, especially the fact that the changeset log would just grow more and more, slowing the entire system[^4].

## Core aspects

- index file (aka "current directory cache" file from the tree).
- speed of git independent of size project
- remember my goal: I want the expense of 
a diff-tree to be relative to the size of the diff, so that implies that 
small diffs haev to be basically instantaenous. So I care.
- Basically, the whole point of git is that objects are equated with their 
sha1 name, and that you can thus "include" an object by just referring to 
its name. The two are equivalent.
- The fact is, I have (time, _my word_) constraints. Like needing something to work within a
few days. If somebody comes up with a ultra-fast, replicatable, space
efficient SCM in three days, I'm all over it. 

### 1. Git came out (mostly) of necessity





- Git relieves from the commit access thing, because you have your own branch, your own copy and you do not affect other people. Earlier, before to commit, you **must pass *all* tests**. This means that, usually, you can even add stuff to others' repositories, but this won't be noticed (until you do not put things in their main branch)
- Network of trust. At the end of the day you need to trust N people because you must do merging at some point
- Git delegates, meaning: user A merges and tells user B to pull. B has problems in pulling because of conflicts or other stuff, then user A **must** solve it, because **they** merged
- Git does not think at file level, but at content level, meaning: it considers the entire history of the project, call it the collection of files. If you are interested in a single file, git starts from the global history until it simplifies it -> INTERESTING TO MAYBE SEE HOW THIS REALLY WORKS
- At the time the most important thing (to measure) was how fast merge it is

1. ****




Few days ago I came across [this article](https://cs.nju.edu.cn/changxu/1_publications/22/TOSEM22.pdf) titled: "Do Developers Really Know How to Use Git Commands? A Large-scale Study Using Stack Overflow".
The research group analysed questions on SO to understand how developers interact with and react to Git.
In particular, the group derived popularity of Git's questions and commands.

The results are not surprising: from 2008 to 2020, of the 20 million questions in SO, over 80 thousand are Git command-related with an **above average number of views, favorites and scores**. And those are not written by junior developers only: from 2013, the percentage of Git questioners registered on SO since at least 5 years steadily increased up to 40% in 2020.

There are even more interesting insights in the paper, but these two examples clearly show that (professional) developers have problems with Git. Problems that, in my opinion, are both of technical and cultural nature.


## 1. It is not clear what a version control system is

In my working experience, I heard 
maybe mention history of git, why was created etc.

## 2. People are scared of making errors


However, I believe they mostly miss a point: that many developers, when writing/reading Git related questions, is because they have a particular

Beyond the usual facts on Git, add some number or surveys:

- [Last Git's User Survey, 2016](https://survs.com/report/nz2odu1spl)
- In the [2023 Stackoverflow Developer Survey](https://survey.stackoverflow.co/2022), Git is the most prominent tool for professional developers (96.56%)
- Found a really nice article: ["Do Developers Really Know How to Use Git Commands? A Large-scale Study Using Stack Overflow"](https://cs.nju.edu.cn/changxu/1_publications/22/TOSEM22.pdf), ---> TO BE USED AS CORE FOR THE ARTICLE



## Why?

- Mention that in schools and universities professors do not invest time on teaching version control systems, then people self-learn
- Git is not so easy to self-learn
- If only few people know how properly use Git (what does it mean to proper use it?), then only few people will learn in teams from those -> vicious cycle
- Tell about your experiences (I. was scared of doing a rebase, E. even though was working for years in the field was using always the same commands and had a difficult time to understand what to do - he would then just delete the local repo and get a fresh copy)



## What is GitHit?

It makes sense to be a series of article with code included where you can play the GUCs

## Get out of the vicious cycle

I myself want to go deeper in Git, and that is why I am developing GitHit, just some code showing use cases on basic and more advanced git commands, for two reasons:

1. Learn
2. Re-visit a command someone forgot how it works (yes, there is SO, but for complicate cases might be useful to re-visit a use case)

Also, other users can contribute in adding use cases


## Things I notice in ProGit

### Things that (probably) make Git hard to use
- Author mentions, Git does not let you erase data easily or do things that are undoable
- The three states make people confused. When they have problems with Git, the solution really depends in what state the files are

# Step zero: get rid out of cumbersome concepts

Try to use a different approach than leaves and branches and prepare the terrain explaining core concepts but **without mentioning git keywords yet (e.g. commit, stage, rebase, etc.)**


## References and Caveats

[^1]: Developers have a working copy in their computer, but neither does contain the entire repository's history, nor it is sufficient to work, say, offline. 
[^2]: Reference repository means that all changes from all developers will, at some point, merge into it. It follow that all developers will also update their own local copy getting all changes from the reference repository.
[^3]: From the Linux Kernel Mailing List: [Kernel SCM saga](https://lkml.org/lkml/2005/4/6/121).
[^4]: From the Linux Kernel Mailing List: [Re: Mercurial 0.4b vs git patchbomb benchmark](https://lkml.org/lkml/2005/4/29/221).